New Execution Module (#5509)
rmosolgo/graphql-ruby: guides/execution/batching.md

section: Execution
title: New Execution Module
desc: Background on GraphQL-Ruby's new execution approach
index: 1
---

GraphQL-Ruby has a new execution module under development, {{ "GraphQL::Execution::Batching" | api_doc }}. It's not yet recommended for production use, but you can try it in development as described below.

It's much faster and less memory-consuming than the existing execution module, but it doesn't support every feature that the existing module does.

This feature is in heavy development, so if you give it a try and run into any problems, please open an issue on GitHub!

## Background

Batching execution follows the work of [GraphQL-Cardinal](https://github.com/gmac/graphql-breadth-exec), an experimental GraphQL runtime from [@gmac](https://github.com/gmac) and collaborators at Shopify. They wanted better performance from their GraphQL API -- faster responses, less memory use -- and were willing to rethink things at a high level in order to pursue it. At this point, Shopify runs a similar, custom runtime for production traffic and has seen tremendous benefits. Ideally, the same benefits will be available to GraphQL-Ruby users soon. Thanks, `@gmac` and Shopify!

> Specifically, Cardinal (and GraphQL-Ruby's batching execution after it) use a few novel techniques for implementing GraphQL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breadth-first execution (or, "execution batching") is an algorithmic paradigm developed by Shopify to address problems of scale when resolving large nested lists. Rather than paying field-level overhead costs (resolver calls, instrumentation, lazy promises) for every field _of every resolved object_, the design instead incurs these costs only once per field selection and runs its breadth of objects with no additional overhead.

The original prototype of Shopify's core algorithm and white paper notes can be found in the [graphql-breadth-exec](https://github.com/gmac/graphql-breadth-exec) project. That prototype matured into Shopify's proprietary _GraphQL Cardinal_ execution engine. While _Cardinal_ is considerably more sophisticated now, its central breadth-first design remains virtually unchanged and runs most of their core traffic.

GraphQL-Ruby brings these breadth-first design principles to the open-source community software, including several novel techniques for implementing GraphQL:
```

Reviewer: I've updated the `graphql-breadth-exec` repo to distance itself from Cardinal (it's now as much Cardinal as your GraphQL Ruby interpretation here is). Going forward, please be mindful of making comparisons against the proof-on-concept rather than the internal engine.

I've also cleaned up the white paper notes in the README to explain the philosophy better.

- It resolves fields breadth-first instead of depth-first
- Consequently, it resolves list results in batches, reducing "context switching" between the execution engine and an application's resolvers
- It optimizes error handling to be finalized in a second pass over the result (when errors are present), speeding up the "happy path"

> This approach can produce a GraphQL result _very_ quickly: In a bare-bones example, Cardinal runs about __15x__ faster than GraphQL-Ruby, using __75% less__ memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breadth-first patterns can produce dramatic results in responses with a high degree of repetition: it's not uncommon to see breadth running __15x__ faster and using __75% less__ memory than classic GraphQL Ruby execution. However, gains are relative...
```

The downside is that many of GraphQL-Ruby's "bonus features" -- beyond the behavior described in the GraphQL Specification -- are either _impossible_ to implement in this paradigm or add non-trivial latency when added back in. So, the task ahead is to "lift the ceiling" of performance in GraphQL-Ruby while retaining as much compatibility as possible and supporting a gradual transition to this new runtime engine.

## Enabling Batching Execution

Batching execution is enabled with two steps:

- Require the code (it's loaded by default): `require "graphql/execution/batching"`

> - Call `MySchema.execute_batching(...)` instead of `MySchema.execute(...)`. It takes the same arguments.

Reviewer: `MySchema.batch_execute` would be a better name, IMO. Or – I would encourage keeping the "breadth" nomenclature. There are so many "batching" utilities out there. Everything batches. Breadth describes the execution paradigm, which itself is considerably more than just delivering on some batching.
